<!--# Test Header 1 c
Tucked away in the Napo Province of Ecuador's Amazon rainforest, the Coca Codo Sinclair Hydropower Project (CCSHP) stands as a grand symbol of ambition and, unfortunately, controversy. What was once predicted to be a triumphant testament to China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), an aspiring international project aimed to rekindle global trade and infrastructure, the dam has instead been targeted by critics as a failed gambit (Radomski, 2024).  

<!--## Test Header 2 -->
Towering above as the largest hydroelectric dam in the country, the CCSHP dam serves as a stark reminder of the necessary planning that is required for developmental projects. The dam was destined to be the crown jewel of China’s investment into South America, with the goal of generating 20-30% of Ecuador’s electricity (Power Technology, 2020). As of March 2024, the CCSHP is currently supplying an enormous 40% of Ecuador’s electricity production (Radomski, 2024). Sinohydro built the hydroelectric plant, which is currently the largest in the country, at a cost of around US$3.4bn while Ecuador invested an additional US$600mn for the required transmission lines (Power Technology, 2020).  

The CCSHP was constructed as a reaction to the previous market-based government, or as former President Rafael Correa called it, the 30-year “long and dark night of neoliberalism” . The dam was built within the framework of Correa’s “Citizen Revolution” (Revolución Ciudadana) political programme. The program is structured around the idea of “good living,” or Buen Vivir (Teräväinen, 2019). A foundational part of this shift in policy includes a transition towards diversified energy sources as part of The Electricity Master Plan, increasing national energy security whilst playing a part in climate change mitigation (Ponce-Jara et al., 2018). With a new approach motivated by development, climate mitigation, conservation, and resource nationalism, the focus on renewable energy sources accelerated the adoption of energy solutions, leading to the construction of the CCSHP as the centerpiece of this plan, as well as seven other hydropower projects. These hydropower projects are geared to increase hydropower from 58% of electricity generation in 2015 to 90% in the future years (Teräväinen, 2019). However, recent policy measures, such as new oil field concessions, have contradicted this transition towards climate change mitigation. Furthermore, significant Chinese loans and investments, such as those made to finance the CCSHP, have restricted resource nationalism, which questions the legitimacy of the policies in giving nature its own rights, and the preservation of the environment .

Despite the potential benefits of the CCSHP dam in terms of boosting electricity supply, decreasing reliance on thermoelectric plants, and mitigating greenhouse gasses, concerns persist regarding its lasting impact and viability. The absence of thorough technical, social, and environmental assessments from the project's outset has hampered plant construction and operation, leading to multiple construction scandals, social conflicts, and permanent environmental harm in the river basin.
