<!-- ## Western leaders' Motive -->

Thus far, it has demonstrated that the involvement of the US and the IMF in the financing and development of Ecuador was not necessarily benign, having performed much of the same activities that the West now criticises the BRI for doing. Whilst this duality in standards may be labelled as hypocrisy, this section also proposes that such criticisms are directed against the BRI precisely because the BRI’s development activities are similar to past Western activities. These past activities were designed to keep Latin America beholden to the US sphere of influence, and the BRI’s mimicry of such activities thereby posed a challenge to the domination of US influence over the Western Hemisphere.  

Since 1823, the US has articulated a foreign policy position (the Monroe Doctrine) that views the Western Hemisphere as the ‘backyard’ of the US, thereby opposing foreign power interference in the Western Hemisphere. As recently as March 2019, then US National Security Advisor John Bolton stated that the objective is “to have a completely democratic hemisphere”(Jativa, 2023).  

US influence in Latin American affairs took shape following the end of World War Two. Emerging as a global superpower, the US was in a prime position to influence political and economic affairs by implementing policies in line with an ideology now known as Modernization Theory. The theory holds that a developing society follows a predetermined sequence of stages, specifically the Western style of economic growth, technological advancement and political institutions. The US was cast as a prime example of a developed country whose developmental path was for developing countries to replicate. These ideological assumptions influenced American foreign policy, which hailed the American duty to intervene in the development of Latin American countries and to inculcate capitalism, democracy and free trade in return for American aid (Hendrickson, 1997, pp. 125-128).  

Latin America’s desire to industrialise in the style of Western technological advancements led it to develop an appetite for loans and budget deficits that the US and its linked organisation were willing to sustain. However, such loans from US-linked organisations ultimately served as policy leverage, as discussed earlier in this chapter, creating a power imbalance between Latin America and the US and ensuring the interventionist capabilities of the US. As long as governments followed the policies Washington and the multilateral lending agencies prescribed, Western loans would continue to finance chronic budgetary and balance-of-payment deficits (Kofas, 2001, p. 3).  

However, alternative financing from China allows Latin America to continue with their developmental goals whilst aiming for greater strategic autonomy and cohesion outside the influence of the US (Piccone, 2016, p.5). Before the formal inclusion of Latin America into the BRI in 2018, disillusionment with IMF-imposed neoliberal policies had already led to the ‘Pink Tide’ in Latin America, which saw a wave of leftist governments being elected  between the late 1990s and 2010s. In Ecuador, this contributed to the presidential election (2007-2017) of Rafael Correa, who made a point of pivoting Ecuador away from the influence of the United States, rolling back neoliberal policies, refusing further relationships with the IMF, and defaulting on its foreign debts. Correa voiced a desire for an alternative to the capitalist system, stating that his government was “building a conception of development that is different from that of the capitalist system, where we seek not to live better, to have competition, to have more every day, but to live well, to satisfy basic needs, where harmony with nature is sought, where we seek the indescribable life of cultures” (Semana, 2020).  

The availability of Chinese financing undoubtedly played a role in emboldening Rafael Correa’s and other similar leftist governments to reject political and economic intervention that they would otherwise be pressured to pursue. Such an availability of alternative financing thereby poses a threat to the economic and geopolitical leverage the US possessed over the Latin American countries.  

The motivation behind Western criticism of the BRI thus can be attributed to the West’s recognition of the geopolitical risk posed by the PRC, which pursued the same strategies that the West had used to gain influence and leverage in Latin America. A similar line of thought can be extended to BRI projects in regions like Southeast Asia, where the US and its ally Japan have also traditionally wielded influence through their role as financiers of large-scale infrastructure projects. As in Latin America, introducing the BRI has led to competition for geopolitical influence between the US, Japan, and the PRC under the veneer of financing development projects.  