<!-- ## What Western Leaders and Media Criticise the BRI of -->

In its article “China's Growing Influence in Latin America”, the Council on Foreign Relations, a prominent think tank, implied that China ensnared countries like Venezuela in ‘debt traps’, lowered environmental and labour standards, and increased control over critical infrastructure, posing national security risks (Roy, 2023).  

Another article by the Center for Strategic & International Studies titled “ Combating Chinese Dual-Use Infrastructure: Bringing In the Private Sector'' suggests that Chinese funding of critical infrastructure projects serves a hidden agenda, with such infrastructure being potentially ‘dual use’ for military purposes (Berg, 2022).  

Another known proponent of criticism against China’s BRI is American governmental committees such as the United States – China Economic and Security Review Commission (USCC). A 2021 report sent to Congress by them echoes the narrative that through the BRI, the PRC has hindered Latin America's development by increasing the region’s economic dependence on commodity exports and strategic investments that enhance its economic control. This engagement worsens environmental, social, and governance conditions by pressuring governments to compromise their laws and regulations to attract Chinese investment. The report further claims that the PRC exerted its economic and political influence to push its political agendas to the countries in Latin America, such as by attempting to use the provision of vaccines to pressure them to terminate diplomatic relations with Taiwan. (Bartholomew et al., 2021, p. 8).  

This highlights how American political organisations advance the narrative that China's development projects are detrimental to LAC countries, framing their criticisms as purely in the interest of these nations without acknowledging any potential ulterior motives.  

American political leaders are among the most influential critics of China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). Several senators and leaders have denounced the BRI, claiming it harms participating countries, including Latin America. National Security Advisor John Bolton in 2018 stated that the BRI is about advancing Chinese global dominance, while Secretary of State Rex Tillerson in 2017 described Chinese infrastructure loans as ‘predatory’ economics, intended to lead to financing defaults and the conversion of debt to equity (Jones and Hameiri, p. 4).  

This sentiment has been further echoed by Senator Marco Rubio, who referred to China’s BRI projects as "glorified money pits." In a press release on 9 February 2023, he suggested that Ecuador was considering shutting down the Coca Codo Sinclair dam due to thousands of cracks and erosion damage to nearby communities. He further alleged that when economically fragile nations could not repay their debts, Beijing extorted concessions to expand its political and military influence. Rubio also stated that many Chinese companies contracted for international projects, including state-owned enterprises, have been implicated in numerous human rights violations throughout the BRI (Rubio, 2023).  

This narrative from American political leaders paints a picture of China as a coercive force, ostensibly benefiting the LAC region while also serving broader strategic interests.  

In conclusion, American think tanks, political organisations, and leaders have all criticised China’s Belt and Road Initiative, highlighting concerns about its impact on Latin America and the Caribbean. Think tanks like the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) and the Center for Strategic & International Studies (CSIS) emphasise political and economic risks. At the same time, the United States–China Economic and Security Review Commission (USCC) focuses on security threats and economic dependencies. Prominent political figures have also reinforced this narrative, framing their criticisms as being in the best interest of LAC countries.  

However, such criticisms can almost similarly be directed against the actions of the US corporations, government and government-linked institutions like the Texaco-Gulf consortium, the Alliance for Progress, the IMF and the World Bank for their actions in Latin America in the mid-to-late 20th century, where it can be argued that their actions often placed American or Western geopolitical and economic interests before that of Latin America’s, and arguably were what led to Latin America’s debt crisis. The next section will examine such historical actions.  