<!-- Reason behind Western Criticism -->

Development projects have never been without their critics. Prominent academics like Amartya Sen, Joseph Stiglitz, Arturo Escobar, and James Ferguson have critiqued development projects throughout the latter half of the 20th century. They pointed out how development projects are based in Western ideals and thought patterns, resulting in skewed power relations, economic dependencies of ‘developing’ countries on developed ones and how underlying West-centric assumptions tended to cause interventionist development projects to fail.  

The collection of development projects as large in scope as the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) will thus have its fair share of critics. However, two major factors differentiate this project from past projects of the late 20th century. Firstly, this is a development project initiated by the People’s Republic of China (PRC). It maintained a largely insular focus until the early 21st century, with its attention and involvement on the global stage largely restricted to economic and regional affairs. Thus, The BRI marks a break with this insular approach, committing to deepening the PRC's global reach and ties with countries as far flung as Latin America (Villar, 2023). Secondly, this project has attracted virulent criticism from prominent Western leaders, think tanks and political committees who accuse the PRC of using BRI development projects as a cover to economically exploit and gain strategic influence over the partner nations of the BRI.  

The first section of this chapter will examine the forms of criticism advanced by Western media in particular. The second section will evaluate how such criticisms of the BRI can, without much adjustment, be similarly applied to West-initiated development projects of the late 20th century, thereby calling into question the moral authority of the proponents of such criticism. The third section will propose reasons for these virulent criticisms by evaluating the link between the financing of development projects and geopolitical influence.  
